A freestyle illustration of "Shang-Chi" 

Author: Po Hei LAU 

Origin: https://corrupttheyouth.net/2021/09/16/8088/ 

The film is not an insult to China, but against the Chinese diaspora, a film 
about how overseas Chinese resist mainland China. 

Hong Kong people have projected too much imagination on Tony Leung, and 
generally only see the figure of "The Grandmaster" or "East is West". A lot of 
movie reviews can be said in one sentence: Tony Leung is so stylish. But I 
suggest, please switch the faces of the two male characters: imagine young Tony 
Leung as Shang-chi and old Simu Liu as Wen Wu, then the perception will be 
completely suitable! Now Leung's Wen Wu is too affectionate, covering up the 
original patriarchal and domineering of this role. 

According to the characterization, Wen Wu has spent thousands of years in the 
past. Therefore, the Mainland China he symbolizes does not necessarily refer to 
the current regime, but also to the Manchu Empire, or even the Chinese Empire. 
The opening narration by Fala Chen is clear: in the eyes of Wen Wu, "there is 
only conquest". 

The first sentence of the introduction to the historical book by Shih Shu-mei, 
"Against Dissociation: Discourses on Sinophone Studies", points out how the 
Manchu conquest affects our understanding of China: "China's rapid rise to 
superpower may force us to rethink current discourses of empire and post-
coloniality, but when the Manchu conquered large areas north and west of 'China 
proper' in the mid-eighteenth century, it conformed to the modern meaning we 
give to the word 'empire'.  Therefore, it has always been the desire of 
Mainland China to have its territory intact, to have nothing less than its own. 

Wen Wu had a couple of children, his son Shang Chi, who fled to San Francisco 
at the age of 14 to be sheltered by the United States, and his daughter Xia 
Ling, who soon fled to Macau at the age of 16 to establish her own fighting 
kingdom. The long-term plan was to make the most of the situation, and Wen Wu 
allowed his children to be free in the field for about ten years. Then, when 
the time came, he took his troop to Macau and brought the two siblings to their 
home with a combination of grace and authority. When they returned home, Shang 
Chi asked his father why he knew his whereabouts, and Wen Wu told him directly, 
"I always know where my children are. That's how I survived." If Xia Ling 
represents Macau, whose way of survival is obedience. Then what does brother 
Shang Chi symbolize? What is it that is worthy of the father's excitement to 
raise the national announcement "My son is home. There are no spoilers in the 
movie, so please feel free to think yourself. 

Although Shang Chi has returned to his father's base camp, his heart has not 
yet returned. In Wen Wu's eyes, Shang Chi is a Chinese diaspora, separated and 
unwilling to go home, always avoiding his true identity. According to Shih Shu-
mei's explanation, "'separated Chinese' is understood as the worldwide 
dispersal of the Chinese nation, as a universalized category based on a unified 
nation, culture, language, place of origin or homeland. The word "Chinese" in 
English can mean Chinese (ethnicity), Chinese (language), and Chinese (
country), but thinking in Chinese, it is logical that there is only one China. 
If one only looks like a Chinese, but speaks English and lives in the United 
States, then he is not pure enough. The Chinese mainland defines whether an 
Overseas Chinese is a pure Chinese or not. 

Dave Callaham, the screenwriter of Shang-chi, is a Chinese-American who grew up 
in the United States and mentioned in an interview that the question of identity 
had always bothered him: Who am I? What am I? Am I welcome here? He meets Ying Nan
(Shang Chi's aunt), played by Michelle Yeoh. When Ying Nan sees Shang Qi, she says,
"Just like your mother. The Hong Kong audience burst into laughter because they 
were directly comparing the appearance of Simu Liu and Fala Chen. Nevertheless, 
the movie's "father" and "mother" are both symbols, and if "father" symbolizes 
Mainland China, then "mother" symbolizes Cultural China, which means that your 
identity does not need to be defined by your father, but your temperament can 
be more like your mother, which inherits the temperament of Chinese culture. 

The mother, Yingli, played by Fala Chen, is the only important character in the 
play who speaks only Chinese. Her place of origin, "Ta Lo", is cultural China. 
The way the movie expresses itself is sometimes so straightforward that it is 
almost blatant: Morris, who leads the protagonist into Ta Lo, is based on Di 
Jiang(a mountain patron god) from the Classic of Mountains and Seas, and after 
entering Ta Lo, there are phoenixes, nine-tailed foxes and other divine 
creatures everywhere. Even the name of "Ta Lo" itself is a fairyland described 
in Taoist texts. The movie almost never mentions the word "China" or "Chinese", 
nor does it refer to specific Chinese territories (except for Macau), but the 
elements of cultural China are unsparingly expressed within the borders of Ta 
Lo. It is here that Shang Chi awakens to the heart of the divine dragon, 
meaning that Overseas Chinese, by knowing themselves under Cultural China, can 
solve the crisis of identity. 

This reminds me of Mr. Yu Ying-shi. At a recent forum in memory of Yu, the 
speaker, Su Xiaokang, recalled how he had a nervous breakdown after a car 
accident, and how Yu taught him a way to connect to the hearts of the best 
people in history. After connecting with their hearts and minds, he was able to 
gain life in the long history. This is a source of spirituality, a constant 
source that can turn us into another kind of human being. China does not have a 
fixed state religion, but it has a non-religious religious sentiment, which can 
moisten people's hearts and souls. Similarly, in the last scene of "Shang Chi", 
Michelle Yeoh leads the crowd to release water lanterns in memory of the 
soldiers who sacrificed their lives for Ta Lo. The message of the dialogue is 
very clear: a thousand years ago and a thousand years later, as long as we have 
the heart to pass on our culture, we can all connect to each other's hearts and 
become one. 

"Did America make you soft?" was originally a remark made by the younger 
sister, Xia Ling, to tease her brother about his stillness, but the whole movie 
tries to tell everyone that the America represented by Marvel is the one that 
uses softness to control strength. The movie incorporates elements of classical 
China, scenes of Hong Kong martial arts movies and American hero movies, and 
allows audiences from all over the world to take what they want and enjoy. In a 
family, someone has to be the face, someone has to be the son. This time, Tony 
Leung is the face, attracting Hong Kong audiences to see what's going on 
inside, while Simu Liu is the insider, how Shang Chi rejects his Chinese 
identity is the core theme of the film. Seeing through this, we can understand 
why "Shang Chi" has not been released in mainland China. The conceptual 
resistance to Mainland China naturally leads to resistance from Mainland China 
in reality.
